Add TypeScript cheatsheet (#355)
gleam-lang/website: cheatsheets/gleam-for-typescript-users.md

const arr2 = [1, "wow", true];
const arr3: number[] = [1, 2, 3];
const arr4: Array<number> = [1, 2, 3]; // eqvuialent

const arr5: Array<string|number> = [1, "2", 3]; // Valid. Array of numbers and/or strings
const arr6: number[] | string[] = [1, 2, 3]; // Valid. Array of numbers OR array of strings
const arr7: number[] | string[] = ["one", "two", "three"]; // Valid
const arr6: number[] | string[] = ["one", 2, "three"]; // Invalid
```

#### Gleam

Gleam has a `cons` operator that works for lists destructuring and
pattern matching. In Gleam lists are immutable so adding and removing elements
from the start of a list is highly efficient.

```gleam
let list = [2, 3, 4]
let list = [1, ..list]
let [1, second_element, ..] = list
[1.0, ..list] // compile error, type mismatch
```

### Tuples

#### TypeScript

TypeScript supports tuple types for arrays. They must be explicitly declared.

```ts
const a: [number, number] = [1, 2]; // valid
const b: [number, number] = [1, 2, 3]; // not valid
const c = [1, 2]; // inferred type is number[], NOT a tuple
const d: [string, number] = ["wow", 42];
```

#### Gleam

Tuples are very useful in Gleam as they're the only collection data type that

> allows mixed types in the collection.

Author: I'm not familiar with that syntax in Gleam. Can you give me an example?

> allows mixed types in the collection.

Reviewer: sure! i recently used it for a config builder with pipelines. but the underlying structure is a List of Tuples:

```import gleam/io

pub type KV =
  #(String, Int)

pub type Config =
  List(KV)

pub fn settings() -> Config {
  []
}

pub fn title(config: Config, title: Int) -> Config {
  [#("title", title), ..config]
}

pub fn description(config: Config, description: Int) -> Config {
  [#("description", description), ..config]
}

pub fn main() {
  let output = settings()
  |> title(1)
  |> description(2)
  
  io.debug(output)
}
```

If run the above should output:

`[#("description", 2), #("title", 1)]`

so technically the tuple is doing the multi-type work here, but using tuples like this gives people coming from TypeScript who are used to objects some more flexibility

> allows mixed types in the collection.

Author: Wouldn't a record be better here?

```gleam
import gleam/io
import gleam/list

pub type IntOrFloat {
  AnInt(Int)
  AFloat(Float)
}

pub type NumList =
  List(IntOrFloat)

pub fn nums_list() -> NumList {
  []
}

pub fn main() {
  let output = nums_list()
  |> list.append([AnInt(1)])
  |> list.append([AFloat(2.5)])
  
  io.debug(output) // [AnInt(1), AFloat(2.5)]
}
```

Although, I'm not sure if this is actually the recommended way to do something like this.

> allows mixed types in the collection.

Author: I think these examples may be too confusing for newcomers.

> allows mixed types in the collection.

Reviewer: agreed. might be worth just a mention to research into. in the future maybe even a link to a gist or example page ([like this one from elm](https://elm-lang.org/examples)) once a good one exists

> allows mixed types in the collection.

Author: Yeah, that could be cool

```gleam
let my_tuple = #("username", "password", 10)
let #(_, pwd, _) = my_tuple
io.print(pwd) // "password"
// Direct index access
io.print(my_tuple.0) // "username"
```

> ### Destructuring Arrays amd Tuples

Author: Sorry, where?

> ### Destructuring Arrays amd Tuples

Reviewer: Arrayss "amd" Tuples

> ### Destructuring Arrays amd Tuples

Author: ```suggestion
### Destructuring Arrays and Tuples
```

Apparently I'm blind, haha. Thanks!

expression in a function is returned implicitly without a `return` keyword.

```gleam
fn identity(x) {
  x
}

fn main() {
  let func = identity
  func(100) // 100

  let func2 = fn() { "b" }

  func2() // "b"
}
```

## Blocks

### Gleam

Gleam has support for blocks, which are similar to functions without arguments.

```gleam
let example = {
  let ratio = get_ratio()
  some_value * ratio()
}

// Also used for explicit math precendence.
let total = { x - 3} * 12
```

### TypeScript

The equivalent in TypeScript would be an [IIFE (Immediately Invoked Function Expression)](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/IIFE).

```ts
const example = (() => {
  const ratio = getRatio();

  return someValue * ratio;
})();
```

## Flow Control

### Conditionals

#### TypeScript

```ts
if (x === 1) {
  console.log('one');
} else if (x === 2) {
  console.log('two');
} else {
  console.log('something else');
}
```

#### Gleam

Gleam does not have the same if/else syntax and uses `case` statements/expressions instead.

if/else example:

```gleam
case is_admin {
  True -> "allow access"
  False -> "disallow access"
}
```

> if/elseif/else example:

Reviewer: the first example is good, but i'm not sure if the second example is. perhaps a good way to showcase a more complex example of 'case' would be to do some nesting inside the True arm? eg. another case statement

```import gleam/io

pub fn main() {
  let x = 3
  let y = 2

  let result = case x {
    // Match specific values
    0 -> {
      case y {
        1 -> "hello"
        _ -> "good byee"
      }
    }
    1 -> "One"

    // Match any other value
    _ -> "Other"
  }
  io.debug(result)
}

1.5 + 10 // Compile time error
```

You can use the gleam standard library's `int` and `float` modules to convert
between floats and integers in various ways including `rounding`, `floor`,
`ceiling` and many more.

Floats in gleam use float-specific operators like `+.` and `/.` instead of sharing `+` and `/`.

```gleam
1 / 2 // 0
1.0 /. 2.0 // 0.5
```

### Arrays and Lists

Arrays in TypeScript are allowed to have values of mixed types, but lists in Gleam can only have a single type.

#### TypeScript

TypeScript has arrays that support mixed types.

```ts
const arrayOfNumbers = [2, 3, 4];
const arr2 = [1, "wow", true];
const arr3: number[] = [1, 2, 3];
const arr4: Array<number> = [1, 2, 3]; // eqvuialent

const arr5: Array<string|number> = [1, "2", 3]; // Valid. Array of numbers and/or strings
const arr6: number[] | string[] = [1, 2, 3]; // Valid. Array of numbers OR array of strings
const arr7: number[] | string[] = ["one", "two", "three"]; // Valid
const arr6: number[] | string[] = ["one", 2, "three"]; // Invalid
```

#### Gleam

Gleam has a `cons` operator that works for lists destructuring and
pattern matching. In Gleam lists are immutable so adding and removing elements

> from the start of a list is highly efficient.

Reviewer 2: It might be good to mention that lists are singly-linked so they're only efficient when adding or removing from the start of a list and that elsewhere is less efficient (has to traverse all previous nodes to get to the right one).

Reviewer 2: Has this been added in a local commit and just not been pushed to Github yet?

- or **interrupt the current block's flow** and return `Error(Something)` from
  the given block.

```gleam
let a_number = "1"
let an_error = Error("ouch")
let another_number = "3"

try int_a_number = parse_int(a_number)
try attempt_int = parse_int(an_error) // Error will be returned
try int_another_number = parse_int(another_number) // never gets executed

Ok(int_a_number + attempt_int + int_another_number) // never gets executed
```

## Modules

### TypeScript

```ts
import example from './my-module';

export const myFunction = () => {
  example();
}
```

### Gleam

```gleam
import gleam/io

pub fn main() {
  io.debug(12)
}
```

Gleam also has unqualified imports to access exports more directly. However,
it is recommended to use the qualfied syntax like `io.debug(12)`.

```gleam
import gleam/io.{debug}

pub fn main() {
  debug(12)
  io.debug(12) // still valid
}
```

<!--

Potential content to add:

  - Architecture Comaprison
  - Compiling Gleam to JavaScript
  - Exporting TypeScript types from Gleam
  - Labelled arguments (vs options objects in TypeScript)
  - Classes in TypeScript
  - Import aliases
  - Unions
  - Operators
  - Promises
  - Concurrency patterns 

>   - Examples of array/list operations

Reviewer 3: also we probably should add generics section

>   - Examples of array/list operations

Author: ```suggestion
  - Examples of array/list operations
  - Generics
```

- [Data types](#data-types) -->
  - [Strings](#strings)
  - [Numbers](#numbers)
  - [Arrays and Lists](#arrays-and-lists)
  - [Tuples](#tuples)
  - [Destructuring Arrays and Tuples](#destructuring-arrays-and-tuples)
  - [Objects, Records, Maps](#objects-records-maps)
- [Functions](#functions)
- [Blocks](#blocks)
- [Flow control](#flow-control) -->
  - [Conditionals](#conditionals)
  - [Switch and Case](#switch-and-case)
  - [Piping](#piping)
  - [Try](#try)
- [Modules](#modules)

## Comments

### TypeScript

In TypeScript, comments are written with a `//` prefix.

```ts
// Hello, Joe!
```

Multi-line comments may be written like so:

```ts
/*
 * Hello, Joe!
 */
```

TypeScript also [supports JSDoc annotations](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/jsdoc-supported-types.html).

```ts
/**
 * @type {string}
 */
var s;
 
/** @type {Window} */
var win;
 
/** @type {PromiseLike<string>} */
var promisedString;
 
// You can specify an HTML Element with DOM properties
/** @type {HTMLElement} */
var myElement = document.querySelector(selector);
element.dataset.myData = "";
```

Documentation blocks (docblocks) are extracted into generated API

> documentation.

Reviewer 4: We don't need to teach TypeScript features here

Author: I was just translating to the equivalent from this cheatsheet: https://github.com/gleam-lang/website/blob/main/cheatsheets/gleam-for-php-users.md?plain=1#L58-L82

I can drop that section though.

### Gleam

In Gleam, comments are written with a `//` prefix.

```gleam
// Hello, Joe!
```

Comments starting with `///` are used to document the following function,
constant, or type definition. Comments starting with `////` are used to
document the current module.

```gleam
//// This module is very important.

/// The answer to life, the universe, and everything.
const answer: Int = 42

/// A main function
fn main() {}

/// A Dog type
type Dog {
  Dog(name: String, cuteness: Int)
}
```

`//` comments are not used while generating documentation files, while
`////` and `///` will appear in them.

> ## Variables

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

## Variables
```

You can rebind variables in both languages.

### TypeScript

```ts
let a = 50;
a = a + 100;
a = 1;
```

### Gleam

Gleam also has the `let` keyword before its variable names. However, it needs to be used explicitly each time when rebinding/reassinging a new value.

```gleam
let size = 50
let size = size + 100
let size = 1

> ```

Reviewer 4: This isn't quite right. In TypeScript you can mutate bindings, while in Gleam you can shadow them. This is a big difference so we should be sure to explain the difference here.

Author: Something like this?

> Gleam also has the `let` keyword before its variable names. However, variables cannot be reassigned. The names can be used again by binding with another `let` statement, but the values themselves are not changed or mutated in any way. The values they reference are immutable.

## Constants

### TypeScript

In TypeScript, `const` is used for variables that may not be reassigned.

```ts
const example = 50;
example = 100; // throws "TypeError: Assignment to constant variable."
```

### Gleam

In Gleam constants can also be created using the `const` keyword. Constants must be literal values, defined at the top level of a module and functions cannot be used in their definitions.

```gleam
// the_question.gleam module
const the_answer = 42

pub fn main() {
  the_answer
}
```

They can also be marked public via the `pub` keyword and will then be
automatically exported.

```gleam
pub const the answer = 42

> ```

Reviewer 4: Gleam constants are largely unrelated to TypeScript `const`. The comparison should be between in-function assignments in each language, and module level assignments in each language.

## Variables type annotations

### TypeScript

TypeScript has optional type annotations (depending on compiler configuration).

```ts
const example1: number[] = [1, 2, 3];
const example2: Array<number> = [1, 2, 3]; // equivalent to example 1
const example3: [number, number, number] = [1, 2, 3];
const example4 = [1, 2, 3]; // valid, inferred without explicit type annotation
```

### Gleam

In Gleam type annotations can optionally be given when binding variables.

```gleam
let some_list: List(Int) = [1, 2, 3]
let some_string: String = "Foo"
let another_string = "Bar" // valid, inferred without explicit type annotation
```

Gleam will check the type annotation to ensure that it matches the type of the
assigned value. It does not need annotations to type check your code, but you
may find it useful to annotate variables to hint to the compiler that you want
a specific type to be inferred.

> ## Data types

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

## Data types
```

### Strings

In TypeScript (JavaScript), strings are represented fundamentally as sequences
of UTF-16 code units. They can be defined with single quotes, double quotes,
or back-ticks (also known as template strings). Interpolation is supported in
template literal strings.

In Gleam all strings are UTF-8 encoded binaries. Gleam strings do not allow
interpolation, yet. Gleam however offers a `string_builder` via its standard

> library for performant string building.

Reviewer 4: This representation info is only true on the Erlang platform, and let's remove the word "yet" as it implies it is planned.

Author: ```suggestion
In Gleam strings are UTF-8 encoded binaries (on the Erlang platform). Gleam strings do not allow
interpolation. Gleam however offers a `string_builder` via its standard
library for performant string building.
```

64-bit binary format IEEE 754 value.

```typescript
1 / 2 // 0.5
```

#### Gleam

```gleam
1 / 2 // 0
1.5 + 10 // Compile time error
```

You can use the gleam standard library's `int` and `float` modules to convert
between floats and integers in various ways including `rounding`, `floor`,
`ceiling` and many more.

Floats in gleam use float-specific operators like `+.` and `/.` instead of sharing `+` and `/`.

```gleam
1 / 2 // 0
1.0 /. 2.0 // 0.5
```

### Arrays and Lists

Arrays in TypeScript are allowed to have values of mixed types, but lists in Gleam can only have a single type.

#### TypeScript

TypeScript has arrays that support mixed types.

```ts
const arrayOfNumbers = [2, 3, 4];
const arr2 = [1, "wow", true];
const arr3: number[] = [1, 2, 3];
const arr4: Array<number> = [1, 2, 3]; // eqvuialent

const arr5: Array<string|number> = [1, "2", 3]; // Valid. Array of numbers and/or strings
const arr6: number[] | string[] = [1, 2, 3]; // Valid. Array of numbers OR array of strings
const arr7: number[] | string[] = ["one", "two", "three"]; // Valid
const arr6: number[] | string[] = ["one", 2, "three"]; // Invalid
```

#### Gleam

> Gleam has a `cons` operator that works for lists destructuring and

Reviewer 4: Gleam does not have a cons operator, and prefer the term "pattern matching" over "destructuring", especially in the context of JS as the semantics are different.

pattern matching. In Gleam lists are immutable so adding and removing elements
from the start of a list is highly efficient.

```gleam
let list = [2, 3, 4]
let list = [1, ..list]
let [1, second_element, ..] = list
[1.0, ..list] // compile error, type mismatch
```

### Tuples

#### TypeScript

TypeScript supports tuple types for arrays. They must be explicitly declared.

```ts
const a: [number, number] = [1, 2]; // valid
const b: [number, number] = [1, 2, 3]; // not valid
const c = [1, 2]; // inferred type is number[], NOT a tuple
const d: [string, number] = ["wow", 42];
```

#### Gleam

Tuples are very useful in Gleam as they're the only collection data type that

> allows mixed types in the collection.

Reviewer 4: Custom types also support containing values of mixed types

```gleam
let my_tuple = #("username", "password", 10)
let #(_, pwd, _) = my_tuple
io.print(pwd) // "password"
// Direct index access
io.print(my_tuple.0) // "username"
```

> ### Destructuring Arrays and Tuples

Reviewer 4: We don't use the term destructuring or have arrays. What should we call this?

#### TypeScript

TypeScript supports destructuring arrays with `const` or `let` statements.

```ts 
type NumberArray = number[];
type NumberPair = [number, number]; // tuple

const [a, b]: NumberArray = [1, 2]; // the type annotation here is not required
console.log(a); // 1
console.log(b); // 2

const [c]: NumberPair = [3, 4]; // the type annotation here is not required
console.log(c); // 3

const [d, ...e] = [5, 6, 7, 8];
console.log(d); // 5
console.log(e); // [6, 7, 8]
```

#### Gleam

Similar syntax is supported in Gleam for tuples. However, variadic destructuring is not.

```gleam
let #(a, b) = #(1, 2)

io.debug(a) // 1
io.debug(b) // 2

let #(c, _) = #(3, 4)
io.debug(c) // 3
// _ ignores the 4
```

For lists, the `list.split` method may be used.

```gleam
import gleam/io
import gleam/list

pub fn main() {
  let ints = [11, 22, 33]

>   let #(a, rest) = list.split(ints, 1)

Reviewer 4: This is invalid code and will be rejected by the compiler.

We do not recommend using list.split like this either. It's not a useful pattern in Gleam so best not to confuse them by showing it.

  io.debug(a) // [11]
  io.debug(rest) // [22, 33]
}
```

### Objects, Records, and Maps

The data structures in TypeScript and Gleam don't quite align one-to-one. TypeScript
has objects (which can be typed as a record) and maps. Gleam has dictionaries.

#### TypeScript

```ts
const obj = {
  a: 1,
  b: 'two',
  c: {
    neat: true,
  }
}

obj.a; // 1
obj['a']; // 1
obj.c.neat; // true;
```

There are several ways to types objects in TypeScript. They provide a Record type,
however, it is not a true record. Though, there is [a proposal to add true records

> and tuples](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-record-tuple) to JavaScript.

Reviewer 4: We don't need to teach TS in this guide, we can focus on the Gleam

```ts
const obj1: { a: number } = { a: 1 };
const obj2: { [key: string]: number } = { a: 1};
const obj3: Record<string, number> = { a: 1 };

{a: 1} === {a: 1} // false
{a: 1} == {a: 1} // false
```

Maps in TypeScript are a class that are similar to objects, but separate.

```ts
const myMap = new Map<string, number>;

myMap.set('a', 1);
myMap.has('a'); // true
myMap.get('a'); // 1
```

#### Gleam

A dict, in Gleam, is a collection of keys and values which other languages may call a hashmap or table.

```gleam
import gleam/io
import gleam/dict

pub fn main() {
  let scores = dict.from_list([#("Lucy", 13), #("Drew", 15)])
  io.debug(scores) // dict.from_list([#("Drew", 15), #("Lucy", 13)])

  let scores =
    scores
    |> dict.insert("Bushra", 16)
    |> dict.insert("Darius", 14)
    |> dict.delete("Drew")
  io.debug(scores) // dict.from_list([#("Darius", 14), #("Bushra", 16), #("Lucy", 13)])
}
```

### Sets

A set is a collection of unique members. Both TypeScript and Gleam support sets.

#### TypeScript

> A set in TypeScript can a set can have multiple types.

Reviewer 4: Not quite- it has a single value type but TypeScript has subtyping. This would be true of everything in this guide so let's not bring it up specifically for sets.

The main difference is that in Gleam these data structures are immutable

```ts
const nums = new Set();

nums.add(1);
nums.has(1); // true
nums.has(999); // false
nums.add('12'); // no runtime enforcement of types
nums.has('12') // true

const strictNums = new Set<number>(); // example declaration to limit type (at compile time)
```

#### Gleam

In Gleam, a set can only have a single type of value.

```gleam
import gleam/set

set.new()
|> set.insert(2)
|> set.contains(2)
// -> True
```
## Functions

Both TypeScript and Gleam have first-class functions. Both support functions as values,

> as well as higher-order functions, partial application, currying, and similar patterns.

Reviewer 4: Neither Gleam or TypeScript has currying built in, you have to implement it yourself.

The equivalent in TypeScript would be an [IIFE (Immediately Invoked Function Expression)](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/IIFE).

```ts
const example = (() => {
  const ratio = getRatio();

  return someValue * ratio;
})();
```

## Flow Control

### Conditionals

#### TypeScript

```ts
if (x === 1) {
  console.log('one');
} else if (x === 2) {
  console.log('two');
} else {
  console.log('something else');
}
```

#### Gleam

Gleam does not have the same if/else syntax and uses `case` statements/expressions instead.

if/else example:

```gleam
case is_admin {
  True -> "allow access"
  False -> "disallow access"
}
```

if/elseif/else example:

```gleam
pub fn main() {
  let x = 3
  let y = 2
  
  let result = case x {
    // Match specific values
    // "if x is 0..."
    0 -> {

      // Nested case expression
      // "and y is..."
      case y {
        1 -> "hello"
        _ -> "goodbye"
      }
    } 
    // "else if x is 1"
    1 -> "One"

    // Match any other value
    // "else..."
    _ -> "Other"
  }

  io.debug(result)
}
```

### Switch and Case

#### TypeScript

TypeScript has simple switch statements that allow for some basic matching of a value.

> There is a language proposal for [a pattern matching syntax](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-pattern-matching).

Reviewer 4: Let's not talk about future potential additions to TS

  |> add(1)
```

### Try

Error management is approached differently in TypeScript and Gleam.

#### TypeScript

TypeScript uses the notion of exceptions to interrupt the current code flow and
bubble up the error to the caller.

An exception is raised using the keyword `throw`.

```ts
function aFunctionThatFails() {
  throw new Error('an error');
}
```

The callee block will be able to capture any exception raised in the block
using a `try/except` set of blocks:

```ts
try {
  // callee block
  console.log('this line will be executed and thus printed');
  aFunctionThatFails();
  console.log('this line will not be executed and thus not printed');
} catch (err) {
  console.error(err)
}
```

#### Gleam

In contrast in gleam, errors are just containers with an associated value.

A common container to model an operation result is
`Result(ReturnType, ErrorType)`.

A `Result` is either:

- an `Error(ErrorValue)`
- or an `Ok(Data)` record

Handling errors actually means to match the return value against those two
scenarios, using a case for instance:

```gleam
case parse_int("123") {
  Ok(i) -> io.println("We parsed the Int")
  Error(e) -> io.println("That wasn't an Int")
}
```

> In order to simplify this construct, we can use the `try` keyword that will:

Reviewer 4: This feature hasn't existed in some time!
